Challenges in encoding parliamentary data: between applause and interjectionsChallenges in encoding parliamentary data: between applause and interjections Parliamentary data has always been of great interest to researchers in the social sciences and the humanities. There are many initiatives at European and national levels for compiling digital collections of parliamentary data. However, these initiatives use different encoding schemes to present parliamentary data ranging from ad hoc ones, over specific standards for representing legislation (e.g. Akoma Ntoso) to TEI. Akoma Ntoso has been created to make the structural and semantic components of digital parliamentary documents fully accessible to machine-driven processes https://unsceb-hlcm.github.io/part1/index-13.html (accessed 11.05.2019) . However, this encoding standard was not designed to include linguistic annotation. In this regards TEI is more suitable. The Austrian parliamentary record corpus, ParlAT (Wissik & Pirker 2018), which was before only available in a vertical format suitable for analysis in a corpus query system, is now being encoded in TEI. In this contribution, we will present the encountered challenges, often related to the fact, that the Austrian parliamentary records are edited shorthand records of the parliamentary sessions and not transcripts of recordings. The Austrian parliamentary records include a lot of comments within parenthesis and formatted differently than the other text, namely in italics. These comments range from indicating applause or laughter to indicating interjections. We decided to encode these comments in different ways using the elements from the transcription of speech module: to use <incident> for comments indicating applause or laughter and <u> (utterance) for comments indicating interjections Parts of this research were supported by a CLARIN Mobility Grant allowing a research visit at the Jožef Stefan Institute as part of CLARIN Slovenia. . In the contribution, we will discuss the solutions for encoding such comments, regarding the Austrian case but also in relation to a more general scheme proposed by Tomaž Erjavec and Andrej Pančur, the teiParla https://www.clarin.eu/event/2019/parlaformat-workshop . References Wissik, T. and Pirker, H. (2018). ParlAT beta Corpus of Austrian Parliamentary Records. In: D. Fišer, M. Eskevich, F. de Jong, ed., LREC2018 Workshop ParlaCLARIN: Creating and Using Parliamentary Corpora In: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation LREC2018. Miyazaki : European Language Resources Association, 20-23. Keywords Parliamentary records, TEI, transcript of speech module, encoding applause, encoding interjections