Five Centuries of History in a NetworkHow should historical researchers encode texts that will be used as primary sources for network analysis? Moreover, how can they link together the various layers of this encoding in a way that explicitly shows the encoder’s methodology and interpretations? This presentation is intended to demonstrate and solicit feedback on an experimental procedure applicable to projects producing networks from historiographical texts. The project Communities of Knowledge: Interreligious Networks of Scholars in Ibn Abi Usaybiʿa’s History of the Physicians (https://usaybia.net)Funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. is conducting a network analysis of interactions among Muslim, Christian, and Jewish scholars across five centuries of Abbasid rule in the Near East (750–1258). The primary source text for this endeavor is an Arabic biographical dictionary written by Ibn Abi Usaybiʿa, a physician active in Cairo and Damascus in the 13th century. This History of Physicians details teacher-student relations, workplace exchanges, correspondence, oral reports, and other interactions among the scholars mentioned. The network analysis based on this historiographical text requires a way to proceed from encoding a source text in TEI to producing a dataset for network analysis. Along the way, it must document at least two layers of interpretation: (1) the primary source author’s portrayal of events and (2) the researcher’s own understanding of these assertions. One way to make these interpretive layers explicit is to isolate individual “factoids” as analytical units. Encoding factoids in TEI and RDF has been recently pioneered by Daniel L. Schwartz for the Syriaca.org project “SPEAR: Syriac Persons, Events, and Relationships.” The current project extends this by producing factoids directly from a primary source and integrating them into the encoded text, as well as by further refining the process of curating resulting factoids into nodes and edges for network analysis.